good evening I'm an Italian national
living in the UK in the last two weeks
I've been closely following the
situation both here and in my home
country many of the Italians that I know
living here and myself included were
wondering how much of the current
measures in the UK have been informed by
what was learned in Italy brandy we've
all looked at the figures coming out of
Italy with I mean open mouths in horror
certainly earlier on and our death toll
is not that far behind it what lessons
are we learning what lessons the
government learning yeah and I think one
of the things that was really quite
striking and I think probably cut
through with a lot of people is so some
of the images that we saw from Italian
hospitals actually if anybody ever need
of a mind if it's just how serious
dealing this virus sees it was it was
very clear from the tragedy we saw it
we've seen in those hospitals we are our
experts are talking to their colleagues
and we are talking to countries around
the world the chief medical officer I
know has been and the two scientific
advisors and their teams and the
advisory teams are looking at what's
been happening around the world not just
looking at it but talking to other
countries actually again just one things
I was talking about earlier today just
this week we've seen a Memorandum of
Understanding sign between Northern
Ireland and the Republic of Ireland make
sure we're sharing experiences and ideas
which we all looked at and we've been
looking but just responded to Julia's
question our death rate is is
approaching that of Italy we were only
about 30 under it yesterday their
highest death toll should we been doing
things earlier not to be in that way we
have we have all times we have taken the
medical and scientific advice around
what we think is a corrector appropriate
for the situation in the UK there are
differences across countries and
actually seen in some countries them
using different approaches in different
regions of the countries as well so it's
not entirely straightforward and I'll
bet other experts have even beyond that
but it's not highly straightforward to
do a direct comparison country to
country but we have taken the medical
and scientific advice about what is the
right thing to do at the right time
and I think this comes back to an extent
a previous question is worse why we've
got to be cautious around looking too
far into the future when we still need
to make sure that we are following the
guidelines today in order to keep back
so Peter you're one of the people
advising the government what what
lessons can we learn from Italy or have
we learnt well I think we've learned an
amazing amount not only from the
experience of our colleagues in Italy
but also in China and right from the
beginning of they leave the Chinese have
been incredibly quick who helped us by
telling us what they've tried what
they've found to be advantageous and
disadvantageous and they've also been
very very quick to publish a lot of data
on the management and I would absolutely
give credit to the Chinese for their
their generosity actually with all the
information that they've given us and
also you know the more we slow down this
this epidemic the more we can learn and
more trials can be done at the moment
there are literally hundreds of trials
going on different approaches to
treatment many of which are starting to
look quite interesting by promising so
coming back to Italy they tried a drug
which blocks the so called cytokine
storm drug called toss Musa map which
blocks
thing called interleukin 6 for those who
are interested and this in small
uncontrolled trials from Italy looked
like it was producing quite amazing
effects in some people with advanced
disease so this is now being put to
proper trial in a controlled way with
there's the C Bo's and other other drugs
and I you know we are learning so much
scientifically about how this epidemic
is unfolding and can I just ask you
Peter I mean just shamelessly gonna
combine your experience since since
we've got you Italy went into lockdown
earlier than us it was one of the
countries that did and I was struck by
at the press conference a day Dominic
Raab saying that the lockdown is working
it has worked in it is working it is
saving lives which sort begs the
question why didn't we have done it
earlier and therefore save more lives
yes very difficult to
the timing right we knew the measures
that would have to be taken and though
everyone knew what was going to have to
be done I think the issue was that the
advice that we were getting from some
elements of the advisory groups were
that we could only do this for a limited
time to get the maximum benefit we had
to wait until the right moment and then
apply the brakes and and get the best
effect would possibly be delivered it's
a very very difficult thing where you
know is it a new type of virus and
really we don't know until we try it
what's going to be effective and down
from your perspective what's your view
in terms of you know have we have we
learnt lessons how's it looking from
from from where you're sitting in terms
of comparisons from other countries I
mean I think sometimes it can be a back
to a sample to compare one country with
another and we often lack a lot of the
context of you know how those societies
have developed how they organize their
economies but one part of that have
noise and this is obviously just Marwan
almost anecdote reading over so correct
me if I'm wrong but it does seem like
societies where then equal is high are
more vulnerable and you can see that in
the United States which is the only
society that's more unequal than the UK
and I think that that occurs for all
sorts of reasons obviously right now
people like to refer to what's happening
in Sweden is an argument for tear
loosening restrictions but I'm Sweden
have got high levels of investment in
public services they've got higher
levels of public trust in government
they've got higher levels of personal
responsibility because of all those
investments over the long term where is
the sort of short tail Muslim that kind
of blade say the the British political
class and this country is really just
the check is common who me roast
unfortunately and I don't say that
globally or facetiously
I do hope and that this is a sovereign
moment for all politicians of all
parties that the way that we organize
our society is fundamentally unstable in
many many ways and even Bo gates who
many obviously thank his and Kurt's wife
some sort of Jewish race of aliens and
China and an order to dominate the world
wife a man-made virus nonsense like that
actually I'm a LG's and a society well
that is very low trust and institutions
low levels of education so on and so
forth he said himself the house
foundation and others had brought to the
attention of governments the risk of
pandemic the risk of not having vaccines
developed all of the rest here like then
he himself even said if we had invested
a fraction and that sort of research and
that sort of early warning system that
we do regularly and maintain in our
nuclear arsenal then we may not find
ourselves in the situation that we are
currently and so I think that this is a
moment of immense humility for all of us
who are deeply invested and the economic
and political status corner Society
I can't think of a better argument for
looking at again Rachel I think to go
back to Julia's question there are
obviously things that we need to learn
from Italy's experience and and
certainly the beginning of all of this
it didn't feel like the policies around
lockdown for example you came quickly
enough in in this country but as well as
learning do you think thought do you
think labour applied enough pressure in
there I mean I'm wondering if there was
a sense of labour went slightly missing
in action for the first views of the
crisis exhausting although the focus was
on or much the focus was on the
leadership election well in the end the
government have to make decisions on
this and as Brenda says you have a role
to play as well as the opposition yes
and you know and I think it's certainly
under Kirsten's leadership in the last
few days I think that the Labour's
approach has been around supporting the
government when they get it right
willing the government to succeed
because it's in all our interests that
government does succeed but asking those
those difficult questions to try and be
constructive because actually it's
through questioning and challenge that
you get better decision-making but the
point I wanted to make we of course need
to learn from the experience of other
countries and we're a little bit behind
the
experience of other countries but we are
rapidly catching up we also though need
to listen I think much more to people on
the front line whether those are people
who work in the national health service
or in our social care sector and what
they are saying what I hear in Leeds
where I'm an MP and around the country
is we need more testing we need to be
testing people who work on the frontline
in much higher numbers and ramping that
up much quicker but also and perhaps I
think most importantly we need to give
people on the frontline the protective
equipment and clothing that they are
crying out for and this is still the
case sadly and we've seen these two
terrible examples in the last couple of
days of three nurses in Harrow who are
wearing bin liners to protect themselves
because there wasn't anything else
available and they have now got
coronavirus and then a gentleman a
doctor in East London who wrote to the
prime minister and said give us the
protective equipment we don't have
enough and we desperately need it and
now he's dead and so I would just say to
the government the people who understand
this best are the people on the front
line who are delivering the care to the
people who are our friends and our
neighbors and our loved ones and we need
to ensure that their voices are being
heard in this and when they say we
haven't got the protective equipment
it's not to be difficult or to cause
problems and I know you know that
Brendon but it's because they are trying
to do the right things and they deserve
the best equipment and the best clothing
to keep themselves and the people that
they are supporting in hospitals or in
social care settings and they're saying
they haven't got that and I think that
more than anything else that is going to
be the number one priority of government
at the moment to ensure that the people
who are dedicating their lives and
because of their vocation putting
themselves at risk that we are doing
everything within our powers to give
them all of the material and all of the
equipment and all of the clothing that
they need to keep themselves safe we've
got a situation at the moment where okay
I think about 8% of people in the NHS
are off sick and we've got the same
again in social care if we wrapped up
the testing if we gave them the
protective clothing we could ensure more
of them at the frontline and ensure that
when this comes to an end that we've
lost as few lives as possible laughter
that's all of
priority but we need to listen to those
frontline workers Peter I just want to
come to you I'm gonna move on to
different there's an element of this in
a moment but when it comes to testing
and and we get approached people comment
to own testing to us time and time again
were we too slow to get off the mark
with testing in your view as a scientist
advising the government yes I'm sorry
the line line has been breaking up this
this end can you I'll ask you again yes
can you can you hear us
Rachel's talking about testing as a
scientist advising the government in
your view will be too slow getting off
the ground with testing I think nobody
would say that we've been able to test
enough and be quick off the mark I think
it's incredibly important to appreciate
the great work scientists who've been
developing the testing in this country
been doing they've been working really
hard to build up from a fairly low base
because there hasn't been enough
investment in public health over the
past ten years and the public health
infrastructure has been reorganized
repeatedly but I think that we do know
that we can get on with the testing but
it's really important it's really high
quality testing we know that positive
results is positive and the negative is
negative and there's nothing worse than
the bad test so we have to have really
good tests let me just give you a flavor
of some of the the comments that people
are putting sending in to a so Chris
Gamble or they're a big mistake to
employ a herd immunity strategy then
change it to mass isolation losing many
days Neal Watson is it time for a
cross-party committee for covert 19
making all the decisions there by taking
politics out of the emergency Tom Paul
how much of a risk is a second wave
pandemic as there was in 1918 is the
government planning for this emergency
let me just move on to another question
from Thomas
Kowalski clearly were all in distress at
this very difficult time and people deal
with it differently
recently a high-profile figure traveled
with her family to deal with this in her
own way with such strict restrictions on
her
of liberties and tours all what does the
panel think the wider impact could be on
our mental health so I think Thomas is
referring to the high-profile figure
from Scotland obviously the the chief
medical officer there Ruby I want to
bring you in here you've been waiting
very patiently the impact on our mental
health this is something that a lot of
people are talking about and there's a
lot of concern about it what's your view
yeah there is a break up on the line so
I didn't really hear your question it's
just in terms of concerns about the
impact on people's mental health of the
lockdown of isolation simply of
loneliness yeah but you know we're
stating the obvious here you know people
say oh we need more of this we need we
all know we need more but there is an
emergency going on right now so rather
than saying should we have done this you
know those of us who have mental health
issues we've been practicing this for
years so it's almost like the world is
now joining us I do a sort of go on
about what I do but I have a an online
service called frazzled cafe org and
every day I have I do twice a day
there's a hundred people each time and
it's a community of people who are just
expressing themselves and really
emotionally we're not equipped for this
and it's not just about being mentally
ill you know I wish I I have a
politician would speak human to human
at one point we haven't been trained
emotionally we don't understand that
it's human to be sad and it's human to
be feel like a failure and it's we've
avoided those issues for now it's
somewhere maybe in the government I
don't think in the government Oh
suddenly we're getting a bit of a break
up on your line there Ruby we'll try and
help each other I mean I think really
we're gonna try and fix that and come
back to if that's all right very
frustratingly you're kind of cutting in
and out down you're not cutting you now
so let me come to you I mean the chance
I talked about we're all in this
together
but when it comes to the restriction of
civil liberties that Thomas Kowalski's
talking about any effect on our mental
health we're not are we in the office
it's much easier for some people to to
to isolate and and much harder for
others you know people living in flats
that kind of thing yes I mean I think
most people are going to be experiencing
some level of of mental and emotional
discomfort relative to what they can
call it so why obviously some people are
actually dealing materially worth more
acute circumstances everyone feels a
certain level of strain everyone
expediency certain levels of stress and
anxiety and it's important to know that
that is affect and everyone and not just
people who are struggling financially
but the the impact of isolation
compounded with financial strain and
security as well as many households what
she'll be there you have children and
grown up and our and our household worth
perhaps an abusive parent act of
addiction and the household the the
impacts they are are quite severe and as
for just isolation and an over sale from
in social interaction and social
connection is everything and like from
the moment that we are in the womb we
hear the voice of our mother that
Springs on lay many of our first kind of
cognitive systems as we develop his
children we get a sense of a place in
the world as well as our personalities
are shaped by the quality of the social
connections around us and even when
we've grown a filler though some are
leading our lives without other people
to connect to and physical space and run
our thoughts by and get a sense of
usefulness and helping others and
lessening to others and and
honestly about how we feel then we
become very unwell very quickly and the
problem is that we often don't detect
how one where we've become we began 11
our own heads we began to buy and to the
anxieties the fears the resentments that
often we can get away with and daily
life by running out for a jog or going
on a long drive
can a holiday learn some retail therapy
know a lot of these things that we
previously cannot defined ourselves by
have been removed so it's immensely
challenging and many respects also just
what it touch quickly yes it just grew
be this have got really bad about the
the case for listen and a lockdown
because of all of the impacts that we're
going to see on people including the
mental health problems people who aren't
gonna get treated for cancer all these
things the difference between all of the
negative impacts of the lockdown whether
they be medical or main or emotional
financial as that these things are not
unknown quantities so we know roughly
how we can address a lot of those things
that which matter get them we can divert
resources to them we can raise awareness
to them we can deploy people in the
community to support me right
quarantine is an unknown quantity know
don't know very basic things about it
except the fact that it seems to have
evolved specifically to avoid detection
okay dad confusion and all of the humans
are design the process I orde only so-so
well I do accept and I don't this is
completely those arguments for whistling
a lot don't particularly for those
impacted who may be in some kind of
danger call with nineteen we just don't
know enough about thing and we just
thought nor what sort of Jeanne were
late no over the ball all right sorry to
introduce exceed Ruby's we've got Yuri
we've got you back and you're very keen
to come in now yeah I mean we all
understand there but again it's all
plastic sorry but it's a lot of
platitudes what do we do that connects
people and what's what's justum in
inspiring is that when you do see people
now they are connecting in a way that
they've never connected before because
we need each other now I'm being we're
in a mutual trauma and so it's no good
talking about yeah of course we lived in
a world where our only identity was what
we did for a living and yes we were run
by social media so maybe we can learn
from what's going on now that you know I
had somebody on the line today during
one of the freslin cafes who said you
know rather than looking at the news the
whole time to see the death toll because
you know that
comes up your anxiety - you know let's
talk about emotional contingent is that
you can really think to yourself what
can I do for somebody else today maybe
call somebody who needs help maybe you
know get in touch maybe do the shopping
that'll make you feel better you know
even if you're depressed which by the
way there will be a tsunami when this
fight and flight phase is over but let's
just concentrate on physical safety now
but I think by being aware of other
people which we haven't been for a long
time that kindness as I say is also
infectious so we should try to create
you know media or or get somebody I love
that the Queen came on and you know
calmed us all down but could there not
be a spokesperson we don't have a voice
that doesn't just say yes we're in
danger yes we shouldn't go out we know
that but somebody who could train us to
understand that it's human to be sad
it's human to feel like a failure you
know just be honest and speak human
rather than standing on your soapbox and
I think we can make a connection that
might last past passes catastrophe and
review talking about the longer-term
impact of this once we've got past the
fight-or-flight mode you talked about
tsunami of depression we I sincerely
hope not obviously but in terms of the
longer-term impact what do you think
that will be then the longer-term impact
is um you know some people are born
resilient it's in the genes and other
people who are you know are vulnerable
there will be major mental illness and
as I always say mental isn't something
that happens from the neck up mental is
physical it'll break down your immune
system which makes you even more
vulnerable but I don't want to stoke
fear I really okay you know I'm really I
really think people should try to
connect to other people I know they
can't do it physically but we were
always too busy in our lives before
maybe now we have the time to make that
phone call and and reach out and say
maybe we could all get phone numbers of
five other people and call up and ask
how they are let's make some of these
possibilities Brandon do you want to
talk human as ruby was requesting there
try a politician I may not succeed I do
try but I think it's really interesting
what the point Ruby just made because
actually one of the things I found he's
first all I worked hard to keep a bit of
a routine but I've definitely been
talking to friends and had calls from
friends and my wife heads that I
wouldn't normally speak to quite as
Wrigley and some I haven't heard from
him for a while I think there is a
really important thing here about one of
the benefits we often a and say when I
was in the Home Office we're talking
about the dangers of social media
actually technology now can be hugely
helpful with all the various apps there
are to have video comes in to connect
with people it's not the same as body
language but you can see people talk to
people and reach out whether you're
making the call to connect with a friend
or somebody you haven't seen for a while
or because you need help you think they
need support it's a really important
time to do that and I'd say in my life
I've certainly noticed that my wife
pointed out to me the other day it's a
few friends we were talking to that we
probably haven't spoken to for a while
and we've made the effort I think we
were never trained and listening and I
hope social media now develops ways of
saying you know on Twitter I don't feel
very well
I feel weak today and everybody will
rush to help you rather than having to
show look what I've got
look at my status I think that drove up
a lot of mental strain well we can learn
Ruby you'll be glad to hear someone call
Michelle Simpson has sent in a Messing
totally agree with Ruby it seems if
you've already received treatment for
mental health it's already in your
toolbox for coping with isolation and
social distancing Mookie says the impact
on our mental health will be huge anyone
who has been locked away from human
contact for any length of time will
fully understand that
Sharon Chapman says what about the
mental health and well-being of people
especially who are in lockdown alone
they live in flats apartments when they
why can they not sit in a park and
coming back to Thomas's question he's
talking about the restrictions on civil
liberties and the impact of that on our
mental health well I think in a way that
the term social distancing is an
unhelpful one because we need physical
distancing and we're doing that right
now in this studio but actually we don't
want to be socially distancing ourselves
from people we want to be keeping up
those connections because they are
incredibly important to help us all
through this and I totally agree with
Ruby that a lot of people's mental
health
it's gonna be incredibly badly affected
by this some people who already
struggled with their mental health and
other people who may not have known that
they struggled with their mental health
but certainly are struggling with it
right now but also I think Ruby's point
about it has unleashed some really
wonderful things in our society as well
hasn't it all of this we're looking out
for our neighbors and our friends the
phoning up our family members and
recognizing that actually we're not you
know little isolated atoms but we ask
the part of something bigger and looking
out for others and I also agree with
Brandon's point about you know having a
routine I've got two little children at
home and so I'm homeschooling as well as
everything else how does that give you a
sort of routine you know you've got to
get up in the morning you do PE with Joe
you might do a bit of maths and literacy
and then you let me go and play with the
Lego but there is a little bit at least
of a routine and you know I'm incredibly
lucky this lockdown I am with the people
I love but that's not the same for
everybody
but some people are on their own and
that is incredibly difficult for some of
those people other people with abusive
partners or in abusive relationships
they are stuck on the 10th floor of a
block of flats with two young children
you know those experiences it comes up
to Darrin's point as well this is not
not everybody is experiencing this
lockdown in the same way as are we it
depends on the circumstances you're in
in terms of your mental health your
physical health and the surroundings in
which you live and I think that those
inequalities those stock inequalities
and society coming home to us are I hope
after this we can build a different type
of society where we do worry more about
our mental health and our social
connections but also that we tackle some
of those economic inequalities that mean
that some people have got so little and
some people have got so much and Peter
you're sitting listening patiently there
I mean is this is the effect on mental
health something you factor in when
you're coming up with your plans and
your any and your advice for the
government yes I mean on the advisory
committees there are mental health
experts and it's hugely valuable to have
them there I think we should also just
fly
that there are profound consequences on
the mental health of some of the key
workers and the health care workers in
particular who are taking extremely
difficult decisions under very tough
circumstances and may have to actually
make life-and-death decisions that they
really feel uncomfortable about
subsequently this has been highlighted
by colleagues at King's College London
talking about moral injury in that you
have to make a decision which you have
then they'll go away and think about
afterwards and you think you know that
person could have lived if only I'd made
a different decision and it's a great
sense of loss and guilt everybody just
wanted to add something in their right
eye I completely sympathize with that
and rather than saying should we have
done something earlier as we should have
physically it would be nice now if
somebody could concentrate a little on
what would what should we do when the
trauma really kicks in if somebody could
just put their attention on that because
that'll be the second wave or the third
wave that that we will be mentally
shaken and I don't mean people with
mental illness I mean those people on
the frontline
can we start thinking of what we can do
now
[Music]